content/data/jobs/18f.md, before:

---
company: 18f (General Services Administration)
company url: https://18f.gsa.gov/
job title: Innovation Specialist
start: 2014-09-08
---
[*Communicart*](https://github.com/18F/C2/): Federal approval tracking written
in Rails

* Despite starting with limited Rails experience, contributed many new
  features and refactors
* Researched and implemented libraries such as
  [pundit](https://github.com/elabs/pundit) (authorization) and
  [paperclip](https://github.com/thoughtbot/paperclip) (attachments) to bring
  new features with minimal effort
* Refactored the white-labelled application from ubiquitous switch-cases to
  implicit path selection (e.g. via dynamic dispatch)
* Fostered a software engineering mentality within the team by discouraging
  special cases and limiting code complexity
* Served as interviewer for several usability studies with many of our users

[*Peace Corps Donations*](https://github.com/18F/peacecorps-site/): Donation
collection app, ~1000 daily users written in Python, Django, and SASS

* Successfully replaced an existing, ColdFusion under-the-desk server with a
  fault-tolerant, Django-based, EC2 environment
* Led backend development among a team of varying size ranging from four to
  eight
* Implemented callbacks and hand-offs with the pay.gov payment processor
* Helped navigate a waterfall-driven client, agile developers, and a
  user-driven research team through to a project launch
* Contributed to upstream projects, adding needed
  [features](https://github.com/mapmyfitness/django-gzipping-cache/pull/1) and
  Python3 [support](https://github.com/gusdan/django-elasticache/pull/5)
* Focused on user security, GPG-encrypting data at rest and deleting it as
  quickly as possible
* Tweaked our Cloud Formation setup based on feedback from load tests
* Reviewed and sought review from my peers via pull requests. All changes were
  seen by multiple pairs of eyes
* Project released to support President and First Lady Obama's [Let Girls
  Learn](https://letgirlslearn.peacecorps.gov/) initiative

*Culture and Organization*: Making 18f a better place

* Helped found 18f's Chicago office, which has grown from one to a half dozen
  people in less than a year
* Interviewed numerous candidates for technical work in the federal
  government, as well as participated in phone screens and resume reviews
* Wrote  blog
  [post](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/04/09/flexibility-when-releasing-a-new-product-peace-corps-new-donation-platform/)
  (seen as "[the coolest work
  ever](https://twitter.com/mynameisdom/status/588799280418291713)")
  describing many of the decisions and trade-offs made when releasing an app
* Assisted developers from CFPB and FEC in running the eRegulations parser on
  their regulations
* Contributed code reviews, technical architecture dialogues, sample interview
  challenges, etc. to my colleagues

Commit message:

Add ATF eRegs and api.data.gov

content/data/jobs/18f.md, after:

---
company: 18f (General Services Administration)
company url: https://18f.gsa.gov/
job title: Innovation Specialist
start: 2014-09-08
---
[*ATF eRegs*](https://github.com/18f/atf-eregs): An instance of eRegs for ATF
regulations, written with Python, Django, Backbone, Postgres, ElasticSearch, &
Cloud Foundry

[*api.data.gov*](https://github.com/18f/api.data.gov): Proxy layer for APIs,
providing rate limiting, caching, etc., ~300 daily users, written in Node and
Rails

[*Communicart*](https://github.com/18F/C2/): Federal approval tracking, ~100
daily users, written in Rails

* Despite starting with limited Rails experience, contributed many new
  features and refactors
* Researched and implemented libraries such as
  [pundit](https://github.com/elabs/pundit) (authorization) and
  [paperclip](https://github.com/thoughtbot/paperclip) (attachments) to bring
  new features with minimal effort
* Refactored the white-labelled application from ubiquitous switch-cases to
  implicit path selection (e.g. via dynamic dispatch)
* Fostered a software engineering mentality within the team by discouraging
  special cases and limiting code complexity
* Served as interviewer for several usability studies with many of our users

[*Peace Corps Donations*](https://github.com/18F/peacecorps-site/): Donation
collection app, ~1000 daily users written in Python, Django, and SASS

* Successfully replaced an existing, ColdFusion under-the-desk server with a
  fault-tolerant, Django-based, EC2 environment
* Led backend development among a team of varying size ranging from four to
  eight
* Implemented callbacks and hand-offs with the pay.gov payment processor
* Helped navigate a waterfall-driven client, agile developers, and a
  user-driven research team through to a project launch
* Contributed to upstream projects, adding needed
  [features](https://github.com/mapmyfitness/django-gzipping-cache/pull/1) and
  Python3 [support](https://github.com/gusdan/django-elasticache/pull/5)
* Focused on user security, GPG-encrypting data at rest and deleting it as
  quickly as possible
* Tweaked our Cloud Formation setup based on feedback from load tests
* Reviewed and sought review from my peers via pull requests. All changes were
  seen by multiple pairs of eyes
* Project released to support President and First Lady Obama's [Let Girls
  Learn](https://letgirlslearn.peacecorps.gov/) initiative

*Culture and Organization*: Making 18f a better place

* Helped found 18f's Chicago office, which has grown from one to a half dozen
  people in less than a year
* Interviewed numerous candidates for technical work in the federal
  government, as well as participated in phone screens and resume reviews
* Wrote  blog
  [post](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/04/09/flexibility-when-releasing-a-new-product-peace-corps-new-donation-platform/)
  (seen as "[the coolest work
  ever](https://twitter.com/mynameisdom/status/588799280418291713)")
  describing many of the decisions and trade-offs made when releasing an app
* Assisted developers from CFPB and FEC in running the eRegulations parser on
  their regulations
* Contributed code reviews, technical architecture dialogues, sample interview
  challenges, etc. to my colleagues
